feat: namespace as a runtime routing dimension (engine + SDKs) (#1984)
MotiaDev/motia: docs/next/understanding-iii/namespaces.mdx

---
title: "Namespaces"
description:
  "Why iii routes on a namespace dimension carried alongside the function id, instead of folding it

>   into the name."

Reviewer: Users don't need to be told this. This is another example of documenting what the software doesn't do.

```suggestion
  "iii routes functions based on their namespace allowing for multiple tenants, agents, projects, and teams to exist in the same system without conflicts."
```

owner: "devrel"
type: "explanation"
---

## What a namespace is

A namespace is a routing dimension the engine carries alongside a function id and a worker name. It

> is not part of either. `state::get` is `state::get` whether it lives in `default`, in `orders`, or in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not part of either. `state::get` is `state::get` whether it is in `default`, in `orders`, or in
```

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). The introduction now uses shorter wording: the function has the same id in each namespace, and the namespace remains a separate routing value.

> `analytics`; what changes is the second coordinate the engine files it under.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`analytics`.
```

The registries are keyed by pairs rather than by strings: `(namespace, function_id)` for functions,

> `(namespace, worker_name)` for worker identity. A namespace is declared once per connection, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`(namespace, worker_name)` for worker identity. A namespace is declared once per worker connection, and
```

every registration that connection makes inherits it.

## The problem it solves

Before namespaces, a running engine had one flat registry. A function id was globally unique, and so
was a worker name. That is a comfortable model right up to the moment two things legitimately want

> the same name.

Reviewer: Similar to the "don't document what we don't do rule" outside of migration docs and changelogs it's generally not recommended to document what we no longer do.
```suggestion
```

> The concrete case is two projects on one engine, each declaring a `state` worker. Both are correct;

Reviewer: I'd suggest rewriting this section around what it enables which is the ability to ship workers that can be used by more than one tenant on the same system.

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). The problem section is now framed around the enabled use case: one reusable worker package can be deployed for multiple tenants on one engine while each tenant keeps the same worker name and function ids.

> neither is willing to rename. Without a second coordinate the engine has to pick one, and every

Reviewer: ```suggestion
neither is able to rename. Without a second coordinate the engine has to pick one, and every
```

get whichever worker happened to connect first. A system that routes by name alone cannot host two
tenants that disagree about names.

## Why a dimension and not a prefix

The obvious cheaper fix is to rename on the way in: register `orders/state::get` instead of
`state::get`. iii deliberately does not do this.

A function id is not only a routing key. It appears in JSON Schemas, in agent-readable skills, in
console listings, in `iii trigger` invocations typed by hand, and in the documentation of every
worker published to the registry. Folding the namespace into the id would mean every one of those
surfaces now carries a deployment detail, and every consumer would have to learn to parse it back
out. A worker's published contract would change depending on where someone chose to run it.

Keeping the id verbatim means the namespace stays a property of the deployment rather than of the
contract. A worker author never writes a namespace into their function ids; an operator decides,
at deploy time, which namespace the worker registers into. The two concerns stay separable, which is
the whole point of having a second coordinate rather than a longer first one.

## Why routing is strict

> Resolution never searches. A call with no namespace resolves in `default` and nowhere else; a call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A call with no namespace resolves to `default`; a call
```

naming `orders` resolves in `orders` and nowhere else. In particular the caller's own namespace does
not influence where its calls land: a worker registered in `analytics` that calls `state::get`
without saying so reaches `default`, not its own neighbour.

The tempting alternative is a best-fit search: try the caller's namespace, fall back to `default`,
fall back to whatever exists. It reads as helpful and behaves as a hazard. Under best-fit, adding a
worker to a namespace can silently re-target calls that were resolving somewhere else, and a typo in
a function id can resolve to a real function in another tenant instead of failing. The failure is
invisible, and it is a wrong answer rather than a missing one.

> Strictness makes the failure loud instead. A miss returns `function_not_found` and names the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strictness makes the failure loud instead. A miss returns `function_not_found` and reports the
```

> namespaces where the id does exist, so the caller learns both that the call was wrong and how to fix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any namespaces where the id does exist, so the caller learns both that the call was wrong and how to fix
```

it, without the engine ever guessing on their behalf.

> Introspection is the one place where a looser rule earns its keep. Asking "what is this engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asking "what is this engine
```

running?" with no namespace in hand is a reasonable question, and an engine whose every worker is
namespaced would otherwise be unable to describe itself. So `engine::functions::info` and
`engine::workers::info` prefer `default`, then resolve a name that is unique to one non-default
namespace, and report an ambiguity when a name lives in several at once. They stop short of guessing
for exactly the same reason invocation does: naming the candidates is useful, picking one silently is
not. Passing an explicit namespace restores strict resolution.

> 

Reviewer: I don't really understand this paragraph. Can you clarify it?

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). The collision section now states the ownership rules directly and separates the two outcomes: a worker-name conflict closes the new connection, while a function-id conflict rejects only that function.

> ## Why a collision is a rejection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why a namespace collision is a rejection
```

When a worker claims a name another live worker already holds in the same namespace, the engine
refuses the registration rather than accepting it.

The alternative, last-write-wins, is how a flat registry degrades in practice: a second copy of a
worker starts, quietly takes ownership of the name, and calls begin landing somewhere their author
did not intend. Nothing errors. The symptom surfaces much later, as a behaviour change with no
obvious cause.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Refusal moves that discovery to the moment the mistake is made, and it distinguishes two severities.
A contested **worker name** is an identity conflict: the worker cannot function as itself, so the
engine closes the connection and the SDK stops rather than reconnecting into a rejection loop. A
contested **function id** is narrower: only that one registration is refused, the connection stays
open, and the worker keeps serving everything else it registered. Treating both as fatal would take
a healthy worker offline over one duplicated function.

There is a case that looks like a collision and is not: a worker restarting faster than the engine
cleans up its previous connection, contending with itself. The engine treats a connection that has
begun tearing down as no longer live, so a restart reclaims its own name immediately. Without that

> carve-out the default `hostname:pid` naming would make fast restarts fail against their own ghost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Note>
There is a case that looks like a collision and is not: a worker restarting faster than the engine
cleans up its previous connection, contending with itself. The engine treats a connection that has
begun tearing down as no longer live, so a restart reclaims its own name immediately. Without that
carve-out the default `hostname:pid` naming would make fast restarts fail against their own ghost.
</Note>
```

## Why it arrives per connection

> A namespace is declared on the `engine::workers::register` call rather than on each registration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A namespace is declared on the `engine::workers::register` call
```

> frame, because it describes the worker, not the individual function. One worker is one identity in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because it describes the worker, not the individual function. One worker is one identity in
```

one namespace; letting individual registrations disagree would create a worker that is partly in two

> places.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or more places.
```

That choice has a cost, and the cost is ordering. SDKs have always flushed their `RegisterFunction`
frames as soon as the socket opens, before announcing worker metadata. If the engine filed those
registrations as they arrived it would file them before knowing the namespace. So it buffers a

> connection's registrations until the namespace is known, then drains them in arrival order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SDKs flush their `RegisterFunction`
frames as soon as the socket opens, before announcing worker metadata. If the engine filed those
registrations as they arrived it would file them before knowing the namespace. So it buffers a
connection's registrations until the namespace is known, then drains them in arrival order.
```

I'm not sure I understand this, wouldn't workers send their metadata first? I assume the worker metadata would be what includes the `namespace`?

This paragraph also covers both SDK and engine behavior, should split into separate paragraphs.

Author: Ideally yes, but we can receive the register function after registering a worker. When this happens, we can sign that function to the correct namespace as soon as the worker finishes the registration.

Author: Clarified in commit [`72851e5`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/72851e51). A client can send registration messages before worker metadata. The engine holds those messages; it does not put them in `default` and move them later. After `engine::workers::register`, it sets the connection namespace and processes the held messages in order.

The buffer is bounded by a grace period rather than waiting forever, because a worker might never
announce itself at all. When the grace expires the connection is fixed to `default` and drained. This
is what makes the whole feature backward compatible: a worker built against an older SDK sends no
namespace, waits out the grace, lands in `default`, and behaves exactly as it always did. Every

> namespace field on the wire is optional for the same reason.

Reviewer: I don't really understand this either it's non-technical and non-specific language. I'm not certain why a buffer has a grace period and it's not the same thing. We should also:

1. Specify what the default grace period is
2. Document how to change it in using-iii or creating-workers
3. Not document what we no longer do/what maintains backwards compatibility

Author: Addressed in commit [`b1b178b8`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/b1b178b8). The docs now describe the `5000 ms` namespace resolution timeout, list the message types held while the namespace is pending, specify both timeout outcomes, remove the backwards-compatibility narrative, and link to the using-iii configuration section for `registration_namespace_grace_ms` and `III_NAMESPACE_GRACE_MS`.

## What it costs

The dimension has to reach anything that stores an identity durably, and durable storage is where
adding a coordinate stops being free.

Durable queue identity is the visible case. A subscriber queue is now scoped by namespace, so two
subscribers of the same topic and function id in different namespaces are two queues receiving the
same event rather than two competing consumers of one queue. That is the correct behaviour, and it
means the queue names changed. The builtin broker migrates its own queues; an external broker holds
queues iii does not own, so those need operator action.

<Note>
  For the migration steps, see [Upgrading from 0.22.x](../upgrading/from-0-22-x).

> </Note>

Reviewer: Have you used a tool like caveman and/or ponytail? They can potentially help with this.

https://github.com/juliusbrussee/caveman
https://github.com/DietrichGebert/ponytail

```suggestion
```

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). I removed the implementation-focused “What it costs” section from the conceptual guide. Operational migration details remain in the upgrade guide.

## Isolate workers with namespaces

Use this when two projects on one engine both want the same worker name or the same function id, and

> neither can rename. Declaring a namespace scopes each worker's registrations so they coexist.

Reviewer: Move this to the top of the doc, drop if it's already covered up there.

Author: Addressed at commit [`f25f543b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/f25f543b).

### Declare the worker's namespace

Pass `namespace` when registering the worker. The SDK resolves it in this order: the explicit option,
then the `III_NAMESPACE` environment variable, then nothing at all, in which case the engine files

> the worker under `default`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass `namespace` when registering the worker. The recommended approach is to always reference
the III_NAMESPACE environment variable so that it can be dynamically assigned at runtime.

The SDK's behavior is to assign the `default` workspace when `namespace` is not specified. If 
namespace is an invalid value (empty string, null, none, undefined, non-string) then the SDK will
error.
```

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="Node / TypeScript">
    ```typescript
    import { registerWorker } from "iii-sdk";

    const worker = registerWorker(process.env.III_URL!, {
      workerName: "state",

>       namespace: "orders",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      namespace: process.env.III_NAMESPACE,
```

Author: This is the default, if you don't pass it, it will be used. This way is the explicit way.

    });
    ```

  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Python">
    ```python
    import os
    from iii import register_worker, InitOptions

    worker = register_worker(
        os.environ["III_URL"],

>         InitOptions(worker_name="state", namespace="orders"),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        InitOptions(worker_name="state", namespace=os.environ["III_NAMESPACE"]),
```

Author: This is the default behavior, I would prefer to keep being explicit in this case.

    )
    ```

  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Rust">
    ```rust
    use iii_sdk::{InitOptions, register_worker};

    let url = std::env::var("III_URL").expect("III_URL must be set");
    let worker = register_worker(
        &url,
        InitOptions {
            namespace: Some("orders".into()),
            ..Default::default()
        },

>     );

Reviewer: Double check this code, I'm not a Rust dev, just copying how url worked.
```suggestion
    let url = std::env::var("III_URL").expect("III_URL must be set");
    let namespace = std::env::var("III_NAMESPACE").expect("III_NAMESPACE must be set");
    let worker = register_worker(
        &url,
        InitOptions {
            namespace: &namespace,
            ..Default::default()
        },
    );
```

Author: This is the default behavior if you don't send namespace, for this reason, I would prefer to be explicit.

Author: Checked against the current Rust SDK. `InitOptions.namespace` is `Option<String>`, so the current `Some("orders".into())` example is valid and intentionally shows an explicit override. The SDK reads `III_NAMESPACE` when the option is absent. The suggested `namespace: &namespace` value does not match the current type.

    ```

  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Browser">
    ```typescript
    import { registerWorker } from "iii-browser-sdk";

    const worker = registerWorker("ws://localhost:49135", {
      workerName: "checkout-tab",

>       namespace: "orders",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      namespace: "users-browser", // Browser has no environment variable
```

    });
    ```

  </Tab>
</Tabs>

<Warning>

>   The browser SDK has no environment to read, so `namespace` must be passed explicitly there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The browser SDK has no environment to read, so `namespace` must be passed explicitly or obtained
  at runtime via other methods. For untrusted clients like browsers it's common to hardcode their namespace.
```

</Warning>

Every function, service, and trigger type this worker registers now lands in `orders`. A second
worker can register `state` in `analytics` on the same engine without either one displacing the
other.

> 

Reviewer: This section belongs in creating-workers/namespaces. The resolution order is also incorrect because the SDK does not automatically pick up the namespace from the environment, it needs to be passed in through code. This is something I originally suggested and then we decided against to avoid any magic.

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). Following the later location feedback, the procedural content moved to `using-iii/namespaces.mdx`. The guide documents the current SDK resolution order: explicit option, then `III_NAMESPACE`, then `default`.

> ### Namespace a worker iii starts for you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Shipping with a custom namespace
```

Managed workers pick the value up from `III_NAMESPACE`, so set it in the worker's `iii.worker.yaml`

> manifest:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a preferred namespace for your shipped worker you can set it in its `iii.worker.yaml`:
```

```yaml iii.worker.yaml
env:
  III_NAMESPACE: orders
```

A worker whose manifest you don't control inherits `III_NAMESPACE` from the environment the engine
runs in, which namespaces every managed worker in that project at once. There is no per-worker

> `namespace:` key in `config.yaml`.

Reviewer: This here was also documenting what the software doesn't do.

```suggestion
<Note>
This value will replace `default` when namespace is otherwise unspecified. If a consumer does specify `III_NAMESPACE` in their environment then that env takes precedence.
</Note>
```

Read the fatal error to report which identity collided and with whom:

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="Node / TypeScript">
    ```typescript
    const fatal = worker.getFatalError();
    if (fatal) {
      console.error(fatal.code, fatal.namespace, fatal.worker_name, fatal.owner_worker_id);
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Python">
    ```python
    from iii import RegistrationRejectedError

    try:
        worker.trigger({"function_id": "state::get", "payload": {}})
    except RegistrationRejectedError as err:
        print(err.code, err.namespace, err.worker_name, err.owner_worker_id)
    ```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Rust">
    ```rust
    use iii_sdk::Error;

    if let Some(Error::RegistrationRejected { code, namespace, worker_name, owner_worker_id }) =
        worker.fatal_error()
    {
        eprintln!("{code}: {worker_name} in {namespace} owned by {owner_worker_id}");
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

Fix a `WORKER_NAMESPACE_CONFLICT` by giving one of the two workers a different namespace or a
different `workerName`. A worker restarting against its own not-yet-cleaned connection does not

> produce this error; the engine lets a restart reclaim its own name.

Reviewer: This section belongs in using-iii/namespace

Author: Addressed in commit [`1e0425b`](https://github.com/iii-hq/iii/commit/1e0425beb3e4531c1fd54df319a0fa47786a6e87). Deployment configuration, SDK examples, cross-namespace calls, trigger targets, discovery, and conflict handling now live in the new `using-iii/namespaces.mdx` guide. The understanding page now contains concepts only.
